Elements Explained
==================

Base Principles
---------------

YAFOWIL is based on a set of core ideas:

1. Runtime rules, static is subordinate, 

2. Don't mess with a framework,

3. Keep it simple and pythonic,

4. No fights with storage,

5. Use chains and trees as structures. 

Callables Everywhere
--------------------

If you work with YAFOWIL first time it probably feels a bit different compared to
other multiple class inheritating, schema based forms. Instead YAFOWIL uses 
simple callables at several places. You never need to inherit any class from
yafowil.* (and if you think you need to you didn't understand its architecture).

Callables are used for every extensible aspect of YAFOWIL. They are bundled
and passed - as blueprints - to a factory. 

State at Runtime
----------------

While one cycle runs (request to response), the state of the widget is kept in
a runtime data object. It collects all information like value, request, errors 
happened, and the rendered widget.

The widget
----------

The widget class is generic.
 
- You never need to instanciate it direct. The factory is the only place where 
  this happens. 
- Except some very very rare cases you never touch it further. The controller
  does the handling.

Only at creation time of Widgets you need to use its dict-like api. This is the
case if you create compounds of widgets, i.e. a form or a fieldset.   

The Factory contains blueprints
-------------------------------

The factory contains blueprints, the generic plan, of widgets registered by 
name.  

parts of blueprint
------------------

The plan consists of four chains of callables. Each chain has different 
responsibilities. Chains are executed left-to-right.

callable: extractor
    An extractor is responsible to get, convert and validate the data of the 
    current widget in context from the request. It is a callable expecting the 
    widget instance and the runtime data (with request, errors and values) 
    as parameters. 

chain #1: extractors 
    Extractors are chained. Example: An Integer Field consists of the
    pure extractor which results in a string. Next extractor in the chain is 
    responsible to convert it to an integer. If it fails an error is marked, 
    otherwise the value on data is of type ``int``. If only positive 
    integers are allowed we can add a validating extractor to the chain.    
    
callable: renderer
    The renderer is responsible to create output (text, unicode) ready to 
    be passed to the response. It is a callable expecting the widget instance  
    and runtime data (after extraction run) as parameters. It can utilize any 
    templating language. YAFOWIL has no preferences nor does it support any 
    specific template language. All internal rendering in YAFOWIL happens in 
    pure python. 
    
chain #2: renderers
    Renderers are chained. The second renderer in the chain can access the 
    rendered output of the first and so on. Thus a pure html ``<input ..>`` 
    widget can be wrapped with a label etc.
    
callable: preprocessor
     A preprocessor can be used in many different ways. It is executed in one
     run (request to response) once direct after runtime data is created. It 
     gets widget and runtime data as parameters.  
     
callable: global preprocessor
    A factory global preprocessor executed for every widget produced by the 
    factory. It will be executed before all other preprocessors are 
    running. It can be used to do framework specific conversions i.e. for the 
    request.
    
chain #3: preprocessors/ global preprocessors
    Preprocessors are chained. The chain of preprocessors is executed once 
    after creation of a new runtime data object, i.o.w. once in a run at the 
    very beginning of the run. 
    
callable: builder
    A builder is a callable responsible to automatically populate a widget
    with child widgets. It expects the widget and the factory itself as 
    parameters. Its a kind of automatic compound and is executed at
    factory time, at the time when factory is called to produce a widget right 
    after the parent widget is created and configured. Its intended use is to 
    make it easy to provide groups of widgets which are always the same. I.e.
    a password validation widget consisting of two password input fields.
    
chain #4: builders 
    Builders are chained. The chain is executed one after one at factoring 
    time once per widget instance.
    
combining blueprints
--------------------

Usually we have some common widgets, i.e a pure textarea, and then we need 
some label, description, display errors happened, maybe a table cell or a div 
around and so on. And it can be very different dependent on the framework used 
or the design we need to implement. But the core functionality is always the 
same. In other words: The input field and its behavior is stable, the eye-candy 
around is not.

Its what the user of YAFOWIL can change with ease. At factory time, when the
widget is requested from the factory, additional configurations can be added by
passing a colon separated list of names, i.e ``label:textarea`` or 
``myproject.field:label:textarea`` and so on. Thus we can chain blueprints!

Extractors in this chained blueprints are executed from right to left while all 
others are executes left to right.  

custom blueprint
----------------

If theres one special rare use-case not worth to write a generic widget for, its 
possible to create a custom blueprint. Its a 4-tuple with chains of extractors, 
renderers, preprocessors and builders. Each chain contains callables as 
explained above. To tell the factory about usage of a custom blueprint, use the
asterisk-prefix like: ``field:label:*mycustom:textarea``. Next the factory takes 
an keyword-argument custom expecting a dict with key ``mycustom`` and a 4-tuple
of chains.   

Custom blueprints are great for easily injecting validating extractors. 